LTER Network Data Access Policy, Data Access Requirements, and General
Data Use Agreement
approved by the LTER Coordinating Committee April 6, 2005

Long Term Ecological Research Network Data Access Policy

The LTER data policy includes three specific sections designed to
express shared network policies regarding the release of LTER data
products, user registration for accessing data, and the licensing
agreements specifying the conditions for data use.

LTER Network Data Release Policy

Data and information derived from publicly funded research in the
U.S. LTER Network, totally or partially from LTER funds from NSF,
Institutional Cost-Share, or Partner Agency or Institution where a
formal memorandum of understanding with LTER has been established, are
made available online with as few restrictions as possible, on a
nondiscriminatory basis. LTER Network scientists should make every
effort to release data in a timely fashion and with attention to
accurate and complete metadata.

Data

There are two data types:

Type I – data are to be released to the general public according to
the terms of the general data use agreement (see Section 3 below)
within 2 years from collection and no later than the publication of
the main findings from the dataset and,

Type II - data are to be released to restricted audiences according to
terms specified by the owners of the data. Type II data are considered
to be exceptional and should be rare in occurrence. The justification
for exceptions must be well documented and approved by the lead PI and
Site Data Manager. Some examples of Type II data restrictions may
include: locations of rare or endangered species, data that are
covered under prior licensing or copyright (e.g., SPOT satellite
data), or covered by the Human Subjects Act. Researchers that make use
of Type II Data may be subject to additional restrictions to protect
any applicable commercial or confidentiality interests.

While the spirit of this document is to promote maximum availability
for ecological data in either Type I or II status, there are criteria
by which priority for data release may be determined. Primary
observations collected for core research activities directly supported
by LTER research must receive the highest priority for data
release. Data collected by other sources to which LTER supported
research has added value is also a high priority Other types of data
including non-LTER data that was acquired for LTER research, student
thesis data, schoolyard LTER data, or legacy data that already suffer
from inadequate documentation or format obsolescence may be ranked a
lower priority by a site with justifications provided in their data
management policy. Finally, some data may be determined of lowest
priority for archiving on the grounds that they are interim data that
led to final products that carry the scientific value. These might
include data files created during stages within an analytic workflow,
raw or replicate data values that were subsequently aggregated or
processed for release, or individual outputs from stochastic models.

Metadata

Metadata documenting archived/online data sets of all types listed
above will be made available when, or before, the dataset itself is
released according to the terms above.
All metadata will be publicly available regardless of any restrictions
on access to the data.
All metadata will follow LTER recommended standards and will minimally
contain adequate information on proper citation, access, contact
information, and discovery. Complete information including methods,
structure, semantics, and quality control/assurance is expected for
most datasets and is strongly encouraged.
LTER Network Data Access Requirements

The access to all LTER data is subject to requirements set forth by
this policy document to enable data providers to track usage, evaluate
its impact in the community, and confirm users' acceptance of the
terms of acceptable use. These requirements are standardized across
the LTER Network to provide contractual exchange of data between Site
Data Providers, Network Data Providers, and Data Users that can be
encoded into electronic form and exchanged between computers. This
will allow direct access to data via a common portal once these
requirements have been fulfilled. The following information may be
required directly or by proxy prior to the transference of any data
object:

Registration

1. Name

2. Affiliation

3. Email Address

4. Full Contact Information

Acceptance of the General Public Use Agreement or Restricted Data Use
Agreement, as applicable.
A Statement of Intended Use that is compliant with the above
agreements. Such statements may be made submitted explicitly or made
implicitly via the data access portal interface.


Data providers wishing to impose further requirements beyond these are
encouraged to include them in their Restricted Data Use Agreements
accompanying the datasets.

Data Use Agreements

Datasets released by LTER sites or the network will be accompanied
with a use agreement that specifies the conditions for data use. For
Type I data, this shall be the General Data Use Agreement (see
appendix II). This document specifies general roles and the
obligations and rights enjoyed by each regarding the use of most
dataset released for general public use. For Type II datasets, a
Restricted Data Use Agreement must be provided with the dataset that
identifies the specific restrictions on the use of the data and their
justification. Because these are expected to be unique to the dataset,
no template is provided although in most cases the General Data Use
Agreement can be modified to serve. Grounds for restricting data may
include the need to restrict access to species, habitats or cultural
resources protected by legislation; rights of privacy granted by human
subjects legislation; or protection of intellectual, financial or
legal rights over the data held by a third party.

This policy becomes effective when approved by the LTER Network
Coordinating Committee. It may be revised by, or at the request of,
the same body. 



General Data Use Agreement

Definitions

“Data Set” – Digital data and its metadata derived from any research
activity such as field observations, collections, laboratory analysis,
experiments, or the post-processing of existing data and identified by
a unique identifier issued by a recognized cataloging authority such
as a site, university, agency, or other organization.

“Data User” - individual to whom access has been granted to this Data
Set, including his or her immediate collaboration sphere, defined here
as the institutions, partners, students and staff with whom the Data
User collaborates, and with whom access must be granted, in order to
fulfill the Data User's intended use of the Data Set

“Data Set Creator” - individual or institution that produced the Data
Set

“Data Set Owner” – individual or institution that holds intellectual
property rights to the dataset. Note that this may or may not be
defined as a legal copyright. If no other party is designated in the
metadata as Data Set Owner, it may be presumed that these rights are
held by the Data Set Creator.

“Data Set Distributor” - individual or institution providing access to
the Data Sets.

“Data Set Contact” - party designated in the accompanying metadata of
the Data Set as the primary contact for the Data Set.

Conditions of Use

The re-use of scientific data has the potential to greatly increase
communication, collaboration and synthesis within and among
disciplines, and thus is fostered, supported and
encouraged. Permission to use this dataset is granted to the Data User
free of charge subject to the following terms:

1) Acceptable use. Use of the dataset will be restricted to academic,
research, educational, government, recreational, or other
not-for-profit professional purposes. The Data User is permitted to
produce and distribute derived works from this dataset provided that
they are released under the same license terms as those accompanying
this Data Set. Any other uses for the Data Set or its derived products
will require explicit permission from the dataset owner. 

2 ) Redistribution. The data are provided for use by the Data
User. The metadata and this license must accompany all copies made and
be available to all users of this Data Set. The Data User will not
redistribute the original Data Set beyond this collaboration sphere.

3 ) Citation. It is considered a matter of professional ethics to
acknowledge the work of other scientists. Thus, the Data User will
properly cite the Data Set in any publications or in the metadata of
any derived data products that were produced using the Data
Set. Citation should take the following general form: Creator, Year of
Data Publication, Title of Dataset, Publisher, Dataset identifier. For
example:

McKee, W. 2001. Vascular plant list on the Andrews Experimental Forest
and nearby Research Natural Areas: Long-Term Ecological
Research. Corvallis, OR: Forest Science Data Bank:
SA002. [Database]. http://www.fsl.orst.edu/lter/data/abstract.cfm?dbcode=SA002. (21
October 2004)

4 ) Acknowledgement. The Data User should acknowledge any
institutional support or specific funding awards referenced in the
metadata accompanying this dataset in any publications where the Data
Set contributed significantly to its content. Acknowledgements should
identify the supporting party, the party that received the support,
and any identifying information such as grant numbers. For example:

Data sets were provided by the Forest Science Data Bank, a partnership
between the Department of Forest Science, Oregon State University, and
the U.S. Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station, Corvallis,
Oregon. Significant funding for collection of these data was provided
by the National Science Foundation Long-Term Ecological Research
program (NSF Grant numbers BSR-90-11663 and DEB-96-32921).

5 ) Notification. The Data User will notify the Data Set Contact when
any derivative work or publication based on or derived from the Data
Set is distributed. The Data User will provide the data contact with
two reprints of any publications resulting from use of the Data Set
and will provide copies, or on-line access to, any derived digital
products. Notification will include an explanation of how the Data Set
was used to produce the derived work.

6 ) Collaboration. The Data Set has been released in the spirit of
open scientific collaboration. Data Users are thus strongly encouraged
to consider consultation, collaboration and/or co-authorship with the
Data Set Creator.

By accepting this Data Set, the Data User agrees to abide by the terms
of this agreement. The Data Owner shall have the right to terminate
this agreement immediately by written notice upon the Data User's
breach of, or non-compliance with, any of its terms. The Data User may
be held responsible for any misuse that is caused or encouraged by the
Data User's failure to abide by the terms of this agreement.

Disclaimer

While substantial efforts are made to ensure the accuracy of data and
documentation contained in this Data Set, complete accuracy of data
and metadata cannot be guaranteed. All data and metadata are made
available "as is". The Data User holds all parties involved in the
production or distribution of the Data Set harmless for damages
resulting from its use or interpretation.

Forward comments to:

James Brunt

LTER Network Office

Department of Biology, MSC03 2020

1 University of New Mexico

Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001
